In this lecture, you'll learn how the OSPF DR and BDR, Designated Routers,
work with a lab demo.
You can see the lab topology diagram here,
I've got my 4 routers, R6, R7, R8, and R9.
They've each been configured with a loopback interface, so R6 has got 192.168.0.6/32,
R7 is 192.168.0.7/32, R8 is 192.168.0.8/32,
and R9 is 192.168.0.9/32, and they're all connected to the Ethernet segment in the middle here.
That's on the 172.16.0.0/24 network.
Again, R6 is 192.168.0.6, R7 is 192.168.0.7, R8 is 192.168.0.8, and R9 is 192.168.0.9. Right now,
OSPF has been configured on the routers but there's only a network statement for their loopback interfaces,
so OSPF is not been enabled on these Ethernet interfaces yet.
So what I'm going to do in the lab is, first off, I'll just verify that everything is set up as expected,
and then, I'm going to enable OSPF on the Ethernet interfaces, and at that time, because it is a multiaccess
segment a DR and a BDR will be elected.
So my question for you now is which router will be elected as the DR and which router will be elected
as the BDR. If you need a few seconds to think about it, then pause the video now, because I'm about to
tell you the answer. Okay, so the answer is that R9 will be elected as the DR and R8 will
be elected as the BDR.
I didn't say anything about configuring an OSPF priority,
so all 4 routers will have the default priority of 1 and it's the router which has the highest router ID,
which will be elected as the DR. On the routers here,
they've got loopback interfaces, so it will be the loopback address which is used as the router ID.
So R9 has got 192.168.0.9,
that's the highest address.
The second highest is R8, with 192.168.0.8, and then we've got R7, and R6.
So R9 is going to be elected as the DR, and R8 is going to be elected as the
BDR.
Okay, so let's go and
do that and verify that first.
Then, I will manipulate the DR election and make sure that it ends up being R6, which is the DR,
by giving it a higher priority,
and we'll also see failover working as well to the BDR when I shut down the DR,
Okay, so let's do that now.
So I will go on to R6, and on here, let's check the interfaces are there.
So I'll do a
'show ip interface brief',
and there, you can see it's got the loopback 192.168.0.6,
and the interface connected to the Ethernet segment, 172.16.0.6.
I'm not going to show you for every router, you can take my word for it,
they've all been configured like that.
Okay.
Let's also check the OSPF configuration.
So I will do a 'show run' and pipe '|' that to 'section ospf', and you can see that OSPF has been global enabled
on the router,
and it's got a network statement for 192.168.0.0, which is the loopback interface.
So right now, OSPF has not been enabled on the FastEthernet interface because I don't have a matching
network statement for 172.16.0.0.
And if I do a 'show ip protocols', I can verify there as well that OSPF is running, and I can see that
the router ID is the router's loopback interface.
Okay.
So that's
everything is set up as expected.
Let's now go and enable OSPF on the Ethernet interface and see what happens.
So I will go to global configuration, if I can type it, with a 'config t' and then 'router ospf 1',
and over in my other window here, I've got the network statement already typed up to save me typing that in.
So I'm going to paste that in, so that's for the Ethernet interface,
and that will enable OSPF there.
The router knows it's an Ethernet interface, so it knows that a DR needs to be elected.
So that is on R6, I also need to do it on R7. So enable prompt, 'config t', 'router ospf 1', and I can use the same
network statement again because they're all in the same IP subnet, so that will work just fine.
So, that's R6 and R7 done.
Next up, R8, do the same thing on there, and paste on the network statement, and I've just got one more
to do, which is R9. So at enable prompt, 'config t' again, try not to make the same typo again,
'router ospf 1', and paste in the network statement.
Okay, so now, if I give it a second to converge and form the adjacencies, I should be able to do a
'show ip ospf neighbor' and see the neighbors.
And I'm on R9 right now, and I can see that
yes, it has formed adjacencies with 192.168.0.6, 192.168.0.7, and 192.168.0.8.
I can see that right now, they're showing as all 2WAY/DROTHER, that's because it has not completed
going through the exchange and the loading states, and getting to the full state yet.
So now I've given it a few more seconds,
let's try that command again, and it is still 2WAY/DROTHER, and there we go.
Now, I can see that the OSPF loading has gone to full.
So now, if I do that 'show ip ospf neighbor',
so earlier, they were in the two-way state with all of the neighbors, and now it has completed the loading.
This is on R9, so I know already, we checked this earlier. We're expecting R9 to be the DR
and R8 to be the BDR, and I can see that.
So this is a Designated Router, so it is going to have a full relationship with all other routers on the segment,
and I can see that. They are all full and I can see that R8,
I was expecting to be the BDR,
and yes, I can see that it is the BDR.
R6 and R7 are not Designated Routers, so they show up as DR for Designated Router, OTHER meaning
they're not the DR and they are not the BDR.
Okay, so that was with the 'show ip ospf neighbor' command.
I can see all that information.
I can also do, so from any router now,
obviously, if you are troubleshooting this kind of thing in a real world network and you're looking at a
segment which does have multiple routers on there, you're not going to be able to tell at a glance which
one has got the highest router ID, which one is going to be the DR.
So a really easy way you can find out that information from any router on the segment is by saying,
'show ip ospf interface' and I can just hit enter there, or I can get more granular and actually
enter the interface,
so this was on FastEthernet0/0.
I can do this on any router on that segment, and I can see there that the Designated Router,
the DR, is 192.168.0.9, which is R9, and I can see that the BDR is
192.168.0.8.
Okay, so that's the expected output on the DR.
Let's have a look
now on R8, which is the BDR and I will do a 'show ip ospf neighbors' on there too, and I can see that
192.168.0.9 is the DR and 192.168.0.6 and 192.168.0.7 are DROTHERs.
And again, both the DR and the BDR do form full state relationship with all the other OSPF routers
on there.
Let's have a look at one of the DROTHERs now, so I'll go onto R7, and I'll do the same command there,
'show ip ospf neighbor' and there, I can see it's gone full with the DR at 192.168.0.9, full with
the BDR at 192.168.0.8, and 192.168.0.6 which is another DROTHER is just two-way there. So you can see the routers
which are not the DR or the BDR with each other, they just go to a two-way relationship.
They don't directly exchange routes with each other.
Okay, so that was all of the expected behavior.
Now, let's force one of the other routers to become the DR, so I can do that on R7. So on R7
here,
I'm going to go to global configuration, and an 'interface fastEthernet0/0', and I will say
'ip ospf priority'
is going to be 100, and I'll do an 'end'.
Now, it's not going to become the DR yet. It's going to wait until the election is forced again, and a
way I can do that is by restarting OSPF, or by shutting down and bringing up the interface again.
So let's just verify that is still not the DR, so on here, I will do a 'show ip ospf interface' and
I'll do that for FastEthernet0/0, and I can see there that the Designated Router is still
192.168.0.9 and the BDR is still 192.168.0.8. But I can see now that on this router,
the priority has changed to 100.
It was 1 before.
So on here, if I do a 'clear ip ospf process', this will restart OSPF.
I'll say yes to that.
It's asking me to verify because this is going to be disruptive.
The router is going to drop all its OSPF relationships, and it's going to lose its OSPF routes.
While this happens,
we have to wait for it to
go back to to loading full again.
Okay,
and that looks like it's done it with the other 3 routers.
So now, let's do a 'show ip ospf interface' again,
and now, I can see that the Designated Router has changed here. It is 192.168.0.7. The BDR
stays the same, it is still 192.168.0.8. Okay, so R9 does not become the BDR.
I've just made this one the DR. The BDR is going to remain the same unless something changes there.
If I went and rebooted all of my routers now, then what would happen would be that R7 would be
the DR and then R9 would be the BDR, but it's not going to cause a disruptive change, the change
to BDR from R8 to R9 right now.
Okay, so that is how you can force one of your routers to become the BDR.
Now, let's see what happens if the DR goes down.
So what I'll do is on my R7 here, maybe it will do this easily because I'm in Packet Tracer.
I will just powered off the router.
So I've just powered off the DR, so now
let's see what's happening on my other routers.
Let's go on to R8, which was the BDR and see if it's detected the change yet. let's do a 'show ip ospf interface fastEthernet0/0'
and looking in here, it's still sees the Designated Router
as 192.168.0.7, and now I can see it has just gone down.
So if I put that command in again now, then hopefully, yep, I can see that the BDR has now transition to
the DR because it saw that the DR went down. And the the next best router at this point in time
is going to be R9,
so I can see that it transitions to the BDR. Okay,
so that's everything. That is how the DR and the BDR election process works on your multiaccess segments.
See you in the next lecture.